What are the elements of the taxation system?
Let's look at the elements of the taxation system, which are used in any taxation system,
whether it is a simple taxation system or a system for paying a single tax on the tax revenue.
The slide shows a list of elements of the taxation system, which we will look at in more detail.
The first element is the status of the enterprise and its partner.
The second element is the contract and the contractual relations.
Next, we will look at the tax benefits, the documentary form of transactions,
the price policy of your enterprise, the reality of the enterprise and the accounting policy.
The first element of the taxation system in tax planning is the status of the enterprise and its partner.
In general, the status of the enterprise and its partner does not have any special significance,
except for some cases.
If your enterprise or your partner is registered in an offshore zone or in a zone with a special economic status,
that is, with a tax benefit, then the contracts in terms of price policy are of special importance.
In this case, the withdrawal of funds abroad is usually carried out.
If the company or the partner is not a resident of the Russian Federation,
there may also be some leaks of resources, including in the form of taxes.
Therefore, if your contracts are concluded not only with residents,
that is, with Russian organizations, but also with non-residents,
that is, with foreign organizations, I recommend studying this topic in more detail either on the Internet or in special literature.
The deal and practice of considering violations or options of the general organization of transactions with public organizations of the disabled is well known.
In the 1990s, the scheme of organization of your production, activity, service provision was closely related to these organizations,
since benefits for disabled organizations were presented literally on all taxes,
both on the tax on the added value, on the tax on profit and on other taxes.
At present, the status of the enterprise as a public organization of the disabled is used quite rarely,
since after considering the practice of tax evasion on these enterprises,
the government allowed the tax authorities to make the appropriate changes that minimized the use of these organizations in the activities of many enterprises of the country.
Non-commercial companies.
You probably know that since 2006, when the President of our country openly announced the operation with non-commercial companies,
the deals with these companies, where significant amounts of funds were transferred, have now practically gone down the drain,
due to the fact that tax authorities often request a list of the status of the enterprise of partners in their requests,
where the status and registration place can be marked.
Individual entrepreneurs as the status of partners of enterprises, perhaps, have the widest application at present.
The scheme is simple here.
Enterprise employees become individual entrepreneurs.
This is due to the fact that if the person receiving income from your company is obliged to pay a tax of 13% in the form of tax on the income of individuals,
then being your employee, but acting only as an individual entrepreneur, not a person, the tax rate on his income will be 6%.
Interestingly, this is beneficial for the employer, who, due to the reduction of the employee's income rate, reduces the amount of labor payment.
The next element of the tax system is the contract.
Contracts are included in any deal.
Another thing is that some contracts can be included both in written form and in verbal form.
In written form, contracts are included in the obligatory order, those that are directly mentioned in the Civil Code,
in particular, these are contracts for construction and installation work, insurance contracts, and some others.
All other contracts you have the right to include in the verbal form.
However, in practice, it is desirable to conclude a contract in written form, where penalty sanctions for violation of economic agreements and the amount of tax you plan to pay to the budget,
as well as other important indicators of your relations with a partner, can be provided.
In practice, contracts are often used not for direct purposes, that is, not with the aim of concluding some kind of operation,
but with the aim of not only concluding some kind of deal and carrying out an operation on it, but also with the aim of reducing tax time.
It should be borne in mind that taxpayers, of course, monitor these moments, these options of relations between enterprises.
In the slide you can see a brief list of things you should pay attention to before concluding a contract, so that there are no tax risks, so that there are no tax consequences in the future.
In practice, contract replacement is very common. For example, you concluded a purchase-sale contract for goods.
If you work on a simplified tax system, then, as we have already considered, a very important point for applying this system is the object of taxation and the size of your income.
If the amount of income, I remind you, is more than 20 million rubles, then you lose the right to apply a simplified tax system and should apply the usual tax system,
and should pay all the basic taxes, such as income tax, tax on added value, and so on. For these purposes, enterprises often change contracts, especially at the end of the reporting period,
when it becomes clear that you have exceeded this limit and you will have to recalculate your income for the entire tax period, as if you had applied not a simplified tax system, but a regular one from the very beginning of the tax period.
Enterprises, instead of a purchase-sale contract, conclude intermediary contracts. This is, of course, pursued and considered carefully by tax authorities.
If you worked on a purchase-sale contract during the tax period, and at the end of the reporting period you suddenly concluded an intermediary contract, then it is quite possible that such a replacement of the contract will be recognized as fictitious and all taxes will be recalculated in accordance with the legislation, that is, in accordance with the usual taxation system.
In addition to the replacement of the contract with legal entities, there is also a frequent substitution of civil and legal contracts, labor contracts, which are concluded by the employer with the physical entities, in accordance with our legislation.
If the employer concludes a labor contract with the employer, then the employer, the enterprise, is obliged to pay a single social tax to the budget.
If the contract with the employer is concluded in the form of a civil and legal contract, then in accordance with the 24th chapter of the Tax Code, the employer pays the same single social tax, but with the exception of the deduction of the Social Insurance Fund.
The maximum rate at the moment for the Social Insurance Fund is 2.9%. If the payment amounts to contracts with employees are sufficient, then it is natural to conclude a civil and legal contract.
We will consider the rules for concluding such contracts in more detail later.
The amount of these deductions is reduced in the form of the pension fund of the Russian Federation.
The content of the contract is no less important. If the contract is a replacement of, for example, marketing, information services or legal services, then the content of the contract is usually quite vague due to the fact that there is usually no material expression of these services.
Therefore, it is necessary to very adequately approach the content of this contract, which, as a rule, should be attached reports on the provision of services in the form of a floppy disk, in writing form, in electronic form,
so that your expenses on these services are accepted as a result of considering the correctness of the deduction of certain taxes.
The documentation of some transactions, which are difficult to register, is no less important. For example, a contract for the non-refund transfer of property, work or services.
As a rule, such an operation for the non-refund transfer, recognized in accordance with the Civil Code as a gift contract, attracts the attention of taxpayers and, unfortunately, is not effectively considered by the parties of this transaction.
The fact is that with the non-refund transfer, it is important to properly designate the reference market value of the transferred property or work and services.
Because it is with the market value, in accordance with the tax law, that certain taxes are calculated, such as the income tax and the VAT. And these are some of the important taxes in our tax system.
Let's look at an example of the drafting of a contract. In this contract, the places in which errors are most often made are highlighted, and thus these places attract the attention of the tax authorities.
First, the subject of the contract must be clearly and clearly indicated. If the service or work has a quantitative characteristic, then these quantitative characteristics should be highlighted.
If the taxpayer is not only a taxpayer, but also a taxpayer on the income tax, then the amount of VAT must be highlighted. Moreover, the amount can be indicated as part of both the income and the surplus.
For example, your services cost 118 thousand rubles. If the VAT is calculated in that number, that is, in the amount of 118 thousand rubles, then the amount of VAT will be equal to 18 thousand, and the product itself will cost 100 thousand rubles.
If you write 118 thousand rubles in the contract without the VAT, then, being a taxpayer of this tax, the amount of VAT will be calculated above this amount and will be 21 thousand rubles.
In addition to the quantitative and summary characteristics, as well as the sum of VAT, which is assumed according to this contract, the description, indication of the legal and factual address should be given great importance when drafting the contract.
There are terms such as a legal address, that is, the address indicated in the charter documents of the enterprise, a postal address, on which a postal correspondence is carried out, and a factual address, which can also change often, as well as the location of a particular company.
The fact is that the address is of great importance, namely a legal, physical or postal address, when drafting the invoice.
The drafting of the invoice for VAT has great importance in accordance with the requirements of the legislator, stated in Article 169 of the Tax Code.
The requirements of the legislator for the drafting of the invoice, which is the primary tax document, on the basis of which tax deductions are applied to enterprises, are described there.
In accordance with the above article, when drafting the invoice, you must indicate the legal address. If your supplier made a mistake and indicated a factual or postal address, then the tax authorities have the right to refuse you a deduction on the tax added value, which is a rate of 10 or 18 percent.
In addition to these conditions, it is very important to indicate to the officials who are responsible for signing this contract.
In the same invoice, the signature of the head and chief accountant is provided. Only in accordance with the confidentiality of the invoice can the deputy chief accountant or deputy director, deputy head, sign.
If your contract was signed by a non-head, and the person does not have the confidentiality for this, then there may be disagreements on the order of deduction of the tax on the added value.
The next element of the tax system is tax benefits. Tax benefits are currently established according to the following taxes. Tax on the added value, social tax, income tax, property tax.
Tax on the added value, tax exemption, are subject to those enterprises that meet certain conditions for revenue for a certain tax period.
Any enterprise with small revenues can receive this exemption on the basis of the corresponding statement to the tax authorities until the 20th of the period in which you are going to apply these tax benefits.
Documentary confirmation of the lack of high incomes that do not exceed the limit set in Chapter 21 of the Tax Code for such enterprises that want to receive exemptions is a subject of close attention for taxpayers.
Benefits can also be provided to exporters. Here, the order of the documentary confirmation is also very important, related to the tax on the added value on export goods.
There are benefits for enterprises that apply special regimes. This is not how taxpayers pay the tax on property and taxpayers of the single tax on the added income.
Let's give a small example. An enterprise is going to buy a large number of expensive machines that, in accordance with the tax and collection legislation, are subject to tax on property.
In order not to pay this tax, the head company creates a new enterprise that applies the simplified tax regime, no matter what object the tax is imposed on.
The machines are purchased at this particular enterprise, at the expense of the borrowed funds or funds of the founders, and then these machines are transferred to the main enterprise for rent.
As a result, the tax on property is not paid by the subsidiary company or the main enterprise.
These agreements are currently attracting a lot of attention from taxpayers, and in this case it is better not to take risks.
I recommend you to look at the website of taxpayers on these issues, because here are currently being implemented many projects by tax authorities to reduce the number of enterprises that apply these agreements in order to avoid taxes.
In addition, enterprises that refuse to pay the benefits attract a lot of attention from tax authorities.
For example, the turnover of enterprises is small, and they may not be NTS payers, but still do not apply this right.
In this case, the enterprise is considered to be a benefit and compared with the average performance.
At the same time, the tax inspection is carried out in a more thorough way than the payroll inspection.
One of the main topics of discussion between taxpayers and tax authorities during the period of tax inspections is the correctness of the documentary confirmation of income and expenses.
This will be the subject of consideration of the current section, that is, the documentary form of transactions.
In accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation, all operations carried out at the enterprise must be confirmed by primary documents.
Currently, the primary documents, under which written evidence of the financial operation is understood, are developed by the legislature,
and are a unified form of primary accounting documents, which is mandatory for almost all enterprises operating in the Russian Federation.
Unified forms currently apply to the registration of transactions on basic funds, that is, on expensive property, buildings, structures, transport.
Unified forms apply to the purchase of materials, to the unloading of goods, to the payment of taxes, to the payment of taxes on goods, transport, and deposit.
There is a unified form in the form of an invoice, which is probably familiar to many of you.
In addition, enterprises can use non-unified forms, if there are no such forms in the unified forms albums.
In this case, the legislature gives full permission to develop such a document at any enterprise, but some rules must be observed.
More precisely, all the requisites in this document should be mentioned, namely, the nomination of the document, the date of its composition, the nomination of the organization that composed this document, the description of the operation itself,
what services are involved, the implementation of goods or works, the quantitative characteristics, if any. For example, the rent of a room can be expressed in the amount variant,
for example, $ 1,000 per month can be expressed in the quantitative characteristics, for example, $ 1,000 per 1 square meter.
In both cases, the contract and the act of acceptance of the transfer and the act of fulfilling the rent obligations can be expressed in different forms.
The amounting characteristics of the operation are present in all cases, and it must be clearly expressed. Let me remind you that in the Russian Federation, where the main monetary unit is the ruble, the operations must be expressed in rubles.
If your contract is concluded in the conditional monetary units or in foreign currency, then it must be presented in this document in the primary, the order of the transfer in rubles, or the amount in the ruble expression is literally written.
Also, in the form developed by your enterprise, the positions of the persons responsible for the implementation of the financial operations described in the document and their personal signatures with decryption must be indicated.
To familiarize yourself with the order of the transfer document at a particular enterprise, there is a rule established in one of the positions on accounting, obligatory for all enterprises operating in Russia.
When making an accounting policy, a turnover document schedule must be applied as an application, where the order of the presentation of certain documents, the terms of their presentation and, of course, the forms of ununified primary documents that were developed at this enterprise to reflect their operations will be indicated.
Let's look at one of the types of documents that are often used in practice at almost all enterprises. This is a form of an act on the provision of services or on the performance of work.
There will be no special, careful attitude from your side if, for example, you are a customer of these works.
I suggest you become a company manager when reviewing this act, when reviewing this example, to understand what actions you should take if the performer of your enterprise brought you a document in the form of an act on the provision of services with a request to sign it and, accordingly, to receive a payment.
A small hint. In this act, several serious mistakes have been made, based on which the tax inspector would have the right to refuse you both the total tax added value and the total expenses under this contract.
Thus, at the beginning, in the first paragraph of this contract, that is, this act, the position of the person supposed to sign this act was not indicated.
Further, the amount of the sum of the characteristics for consulting services and the sum of the tax added value were not provided.
Below, as you can see, the positional indicators of the persons who signed this contract were not indicated. Thus, at the manager's place, you should not have signed this act, but should have drawn up a protocol with claims,
carefully indicating all the mistakes, and this protocol would be the basis for refusing to sign this act and paying the compensation accordingly.
In the workbook, you can consider this example in more detail and practice filling out the protocol on the claimant's claim.
The next element of the taxation system is the price policy. In general, there are several criteria for determining the price for taxation on different types of taxes.
As mentioned earlier, special groups of taxpayers are allocated among taxpayers in Russia and abroad, who are recognized as interdependent persons.
These enterprises, whose share of the participation is more than 20%, are treated with special care.
These are the people who are directly or indirectly affected by the price policy of the enterprise.
The list of interdependent persons, who attract special attention of taxpayers, and the price policy, which is related to the review of transactions involving interdependent persons, is indicated in Article 20 and 40 of the First Tax Code.
In the near future, special chapters will be adopted, which will consider in more detail the concept of interdependent persons and the order of checking the price of education on the subject of loyalty to taxation.
At the moment, the normal prices that are accepted by taxpayers are those when the starting price is slightly higher than the purchase price. In this case, the prices are considered market-appropriate and do not raise any questions from the tax authorities.
If the prices do not correspond to the market prices, then more detailed checks are carried out.
For example, if an enterprise that is part of a holding company receives a product produced by a holding company at prices lower than market prices,
as it is known, such prices are called transferable and attract a lot of attention of taxpayers, and, accordingly, the price review is possible.
If the prices are obviously higher, then the sanctions will certainly follow from the tax authorities, since such prices are usually applied when tax deductions are minimized, both in the form of tax deductions on the NTS and on the expense of the tax on the profit.
Usually, there are such transactions when the supplier changes sharply and the price of the goods, services and services is much higher than the previous suppliers.
Obviously, the prices are lower, and they can also attract attention during checks, since they are usually associated with the holding of advertising promotions.
Advertising promotions are not prohibited by law, but in this case it is very important to correctly document the plan of holding advertising promotions, the plan of determining the price in accordance with the promotion of a particular product, service or service to the market, which naturally attracts more customers at a lower price than at a normal market price.
The next option in the price policy of an enterprise can be the benefit prices.
They can be provided for individual partners, and no questions from the tax authorities are raised, only those benefit prices that are provided, for example, for budget organizations or for the organization of the disabled, for socially unprotected layers of the population.
If the prices for the realizable property are lower than the balance, then, in principle, only the status of the partner is important here, according to which you realize a particular property or service.
For example, you can realize property to church organizations or to the organizations of the disabled at a price much lower than your balance, and this is acceptable and does not cause any complaints.
If the benefit prices do not cover your expenses, then this will undoubtedly attract attention and follow a thorough documentary tax check, especially if the benefit prices do not systematically cover expenses during several tax periods.
The next element of the tax system that we must consider is the reality of the activities carried out.
Special attention was paid to this concept, this element, in 2006, when the decision of the Supreme Court was issued on October 12, 2006, under No. 53.
The fact is that when determining the reasonableness of the tax benefits received by an enterprise, a large part of it is the vague concept of the reality of the activity.
For example, if the real need of the buyer in goods, work, services is absent, then, of course, the costs of their purchase can be questioned.
For example, an enterprise that implements goods via the Internet does not necessarily have to carry out and can carry out a very expensive office repair,
since clients do not go to this office, and there is no point in the expensive business and in the purchase of expensive office properties, for example, aquariums.
On the other hand, there may be a lack of real opportunity to carry out any production activity, and then a deal with such a partner can also be questioned.
For example, your enterprise has a deal with a small enterprise on the production of any products.
If at this enterprise it turns out that there are no corresponding production areas, for example, only an office is rented, and according to the documents this enterprise produces any goods,
then this deal will be questioned, and your expenses associated with the purchase of goods at this enterprise will also not be taken into account when calculating taxes.
In other words, if you buy bulbs at a disabled enterprise, then this is real activity, if you buy forest from a disabled organization, then this is completely unrealistic activity, and since the doubts are obvious, this deal can be considered fictitious.
But, of course, distortion of real data in the documents can lead to tax sanctions.
For example, if during tax inspection it is visible that your employees have high enough income, and you reflect low income in the primary documents,
then, accordingly, there will be a question of the possibility of lowering the income, and a more thorough inspection will take place, including a meeting with your counterparts and partners.
The next and last element of the tax system is accounting policy.
As we have already said, the main elements, the main points when considering accounting policy, when approving this order, which should be adopted before the start of the tax period,
for example, in 2008 we had to develop accounting policy and approve it by the order of the head in December 2007.
At the same time, it should be borne in mind that accounting policy is developed for the purposes of accounting accounting, and if you are on the general tax system, accounting policy is also developed for the purposes of tax accounting.
Since for the purpose of calculating tax on income, accounting data on primary documents reflected in the accounting record should be somewhat corrected for the composition of the tax declaration on tax on income and calculation of the tax base on this tax.
First of all, the method of recognizing income and expenses is very important. In accounting policy, we must determine this method, the choice of this method.
If your income does not exceed 1 million rubles on average for the last four quarters, then, of course, the method, the method choice is very important.
If your average income for the last four quarters still exceeds the million ruble limit, then it is not necessary to approve this method, since the method of calculation, of unloading is used by default, since there is no possibility to apply the cash method.
The calculation of reserves is a very important element in reducing tax payments during the tax period. A small example of what reserves are needed and when they are calculated.
First of all, reserves should be noted, they are calculated only when our income is recognized as the unloading of goods, work and services, and not as the income of money.
To optimize the tax base a little, since the non-payments in the country are still quite common, or you sign contracts with a payment deadline,
then, if there is no income from the cash on the account or in the cash register of the enterprise, it is not possible to pay taxes from the cash. Therefore, the tax code provides for the calculation of virtual expenses, for example, in the form of reserves.
If, for example, you plan to repair a building, a building or a transport at the end of the year, then the legislator allows the amount of expenses planned for the repair to be taken into account in the tax base at the beginning of the tax period.
For example, the repair is planned for 5 million in September-October 2008, having distributed this amount evenly for four quarters, that is, for the accounting period on the income tax.
The first amount in the form of a reserve for the implementation of repairs you have the right to take into account in the first quarter, in the first report for this year.
It should be noted that the reserves are provided for the payment of upcoming vacations, for the reserve for the payment of the 13th salary, for the payment of the reward for the work as a result of the year.
There is a reserve for warranty repairs. These are all the reserves that are currently provided in Chapter 25 of the Tax Code.
Thus, with the help of reserves, the position of income and expenses calculated in a virtual way is equaled.
The last place and mandatory position is present in the selection of methods for writing down the materials of the main means of goods.
Thus, the materials can be written down in accordance with the policy adopted by the accounting and in accordance with the legislation, one of four methods.
By the method of the average cost, by the unit of reserves, by the method of FIFA or LIFA, you can specify the benefits and needs of applying a particular method to a group of materials or basic goods.
It is important to clarify the requirements of accountants who must know how to calculate in accordance with the legislation.
A good tool for tax planning on tax revenue is the formation of direct and indirect expenses.
The fact is that in accordance with the tax law, the composition of direct expenses, which directly relate to the production of a particular type of product or work or service,
can be completely different depending on the type of activity, type of product, and can also differ from the method of composition of direct expenses for accounting purposes.
Depending on the composition, the list of direct and indirect expenses that we provide to the accounting policy for the purpose of taxation, this will be our tax base in the current tax period.
Of all the types of reserves that an enterprise can accumulate when applying the accumulation method, perhaps the main place is the reserve on dubious debts.
For dubious debts, for the purpose of tax accounting on tax revenue, a debt that has not been paid for the period established by the contract between the supplier and the buyer is taken.
The reserve can be accumulated for both accounting purposes and tax purposes, but it is of particular importance when applying the accumulation method, when you must already reflect the revenue from the implementation of the goods you have unloaded, work and services, money is not received, you must pay the tax on the profit, and there are no return funds.
To do this, the legislator provided the possibility of accumulating a reserve on dubious debts, which can be used by all enterprises that are in the regular tax system and apply the accumulation method.
Thus, a reserve on dubious debts of 100% from the debtor's debt, which is questionable to taxpayers, can be accumulated by an enterprise within 90 days of the term of payment under the contract.
In addition, accounting policy requires a reflection of the order of payment of advance payments chosen by you. According to the 25th chapter of the Tax Code, advance payments on tax on the profit, which we are obliged to pay as a result of the first quarter, half-year, nine months and years, may be as follows.
The first option is the quarterly payment of advance payments, the second is the monthly payment of advance payments, and the third option is the monthly advance payments, but calculated according to the actual data for the reporting period.
All these methods and options for calculating the tax base on the tax on the profit we must reflect in accounting policy. All enterprises have such items of primary necessity as property in the form of buildings, structures, at least furniture and computing equipment.
Therefore, the company managers, not to mention accountants, of course, need to know the options for forming the value of the property. The Tax Code provides that all actual costs associated with the acquisition of this property are included in the initial value of the property.
There is a certain limit on the value of the property purchased, the cost of the main funds that will be credited to the expense part of the tax base on the profit during the term of operation of this property.
This limit is 20,000 rubles, that is, starting from 2,001 rubles, the property will be recognized in the tax record as amortized.
If the property costs less than this limit, then we have the right to write down the cost of the purchased objects immediately, that is, at the time of purchase.
For example, we decided to purchase a Kserox, its price in the store is 19,700 rubles. To bring this Kserox to our office, we can choose one of the options, either to use the services of our own transport, and then, according to the calculations of economists and accountants, these expenses will be 500 rubles,
or to use the services of the store. The difference here is associated with the formation of the initial value, that in the first option, when we bring Kserox with our own forces, then the cost of expenses in the amount of 500 rubles should be taken into account in the value of Kserox.
And our Kserox will cost 19,700 plus 500 rubles, that is, 20,200 rubles.
And if we bring this Kserox with the forces of the store, the cost of transport services will be included in the cost of Kserox according to the terms of the contract, then our Kserox, as it was, will remain at this cost.